---
date: 2021-12-12
title: "알고리즘 정리 2"

excerpt: "Graph Flow, Cut, Paths, Matching"

categories: 
  - algorithm
tags: 
  - study
  - algorithm

# 목차
toc: true  
toc_sticky: true 
---

## Chapter 7. Graph Flow, Cut, Paths, Matching

---
          
## 1. Maximum Flow and Minimum Cut 
- Flow value lemma
$$\displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;A}^{}{f(e)}-\displaystyle\sum_{e\;in\;to\;A}^{}{f(e)}=v(f)$$

  > Pf.  
  > $$v(f) = \displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;s}^{}{f(e)}$$
  > $$= \displaystyle\sum_{v \in A}^{}{[\displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;v}^{}{f(e)} - \displaystyle\sum_{e\;in\;to\;v}^{}{f(e)}]} \\ -> by \;flow\;conservation, all\;terms\;except\;v=s\;are\;0 $$ 
  > $$= \displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;A}^{}{f(e)}-\displaystyle\sum_{e\;in\;to\;A}^{}{f(e)}$$

- Weak duality : Let f be any flow, and let (A, B) be any s-t cut. Then the value of the flow is at most the capacity of the cut. 
  $$v(f) \leq cap(A, B)$$

## 2. Maximum Flow Algorithm
### Optimality
  - Corollary : let f be any flow, and let (A, B) be any cut. If v(f) = cap(A, B), then f is a max flow and (A, B) is a min cut.

### Maximum Flow Algorithm
  - Greedy algorithm
    - Start with f(e)=0 for all edge $e \in E$
    - Find an s-t path P where each edge has f(e) < c(e)
    - Augment flow along path P
    - Repeat until you get stuck.
    - -> **not optimal**
  - Ford-Fulkerson Algorithm
    - Original edge : e=(u, v)
    - Residual edge : "undo" flow sent. $e=(u,v)$ and $e^R=(v, u)$
    - Residual graph : $G_f = (V,E_f)$

```python
Ford-Fulkerson(G, s, t, c) {
  foreach e in E 
    f(e) = 0
  G_f <- residual graph

  while (there exists augmenting path P) {
    f = Augment(f, c, P)
    update G_f
  }
  return f
}

Augment(f, c, P) {
  b = bottleneck(P)
  foreach e in P {
    if (e in E) f(e) = f(e) + b
    else f(e^R) = f(e^R) - b
  }
  return f
}
```

### Analysis
  - Augmenting path theorem : Flow f is a max flow iff there are no augmenting paths.
  - Max-flow min-cut theorem : The value of the max flow is equal to the value of the min cut.
  - Pf : We prove both simultaneously by showing TFAE
    1. There exists a cut (A, B) such that v(f) = cap(A, B)
    2. Flow f is a max flow
    3. There is no augmenting path relative to f
    <br><br>
    > a => b : weak duality lemma <br>
    > b => c : we show contrapositive(대우) 
    > - Let f be a flow. If there exists an augmenting path, then we can improve f by sending flow along path. <br>
    
    > c => a
    > - Let f be a flow with no augmenting paths.
    > - Let A be set of vertices reachable from s in residual graph.
    > - By definition of A, $s \in A$
    > - By definition of f, $t \notin A$ 
    > $$v(f) = \displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;A}^{}{f(e)}-\displaystyle\sum_{e\;in\;to\;A}^{}{f(e)} \\ = \displaystyle\sum_{e\;out\;of\;A}^{}{c(e)} \\ = cap(A, B)$$
  
  - Assumption : All capacities are integers between 1 and C.
  - Invariant : Every flow value f(e) and every residual capacity $c_f(e)$ remains an integer throughout the algorithm

  - Theorem : THe algorithm terminates in at most $v(f^*) \leq nC$ iterations.
  - Corollary : If C = 1, Ford-Fulkerson runs in O(mn) time.
  - Integrality theorem  : If all capacities are integers, then there exists a max flow f for which every flow value f(e) is an integer.

## 3. Choosing Good Augmenting Paths

### Ford-Fulkerson : Exponential Number of Augmentions
Q. Is Generic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm(O(mnC)) polynomial in input size?

A. No. If max capacity is C, then algorithm can take C iterations.

### Choosing Good Augmenting paths
- Use care when selecting augmenting paths
  - Some choices lead to exponential algorithms -> O(mnC)
  - Clever choices lead to polynomial algorithms -> $O(m^2n), O(m^2logC)$
  - If **capacities are irrational**, algorithm not guaranteed to terminate!
- Goal : choose augmenting paths so that:
  - Can find augmenting paths efficiently
  - Few iterations.
- Choose augmenting paths with
  1. Max bottleneck capacity
  2. Sufficiently large bottleneck capacity -> $O(m^2logC)$
  3. Fewest number of edges -> $O(m^2n)$

### Capacity Scaling
- Intuition : Choosing path with highest bottleneck capacity increases flow by max possible amount.
  - Maintain scaling parameter $\Delta$

```python
Scaling-Max-Flow(G, s, t, c) {
  foreach (e in E) f(e) = 0
  delta = smallest power of 2 greater than or equal to C
  G_f = residual graph

  while (delta => 1) {
    G_f(delta) # delta-residual graph
    while (there exists augmenting path P in G_f(delta)) {
      f = augment(f, c, P)
      update G_f(delta)
    }
    delta = delta / 2
  }
  return f
}
```

- Correctness 
  - Assumption : All edge capacities are integers between 1 and C
  - Integrality invariant : All flow and residual capacity values are integral.
  - Correctness : If the algorithm terminates, then f is a max flow/
    - Pf : By integrality invariant, when $\Delta = 1 => G_f(\Delta) = G_f$ <br> Upon termination of $\Delta = 1$ phase, there are no augmenting paths.
- Running Time
  - Lemma 1 : The outer while loop repeats 1 + log2C times.
    - Pf : Initially $C \leq \Delta \lt 2C$. $\Delta$ decreases by a factor of 2 each iteration
  - Lemma 2 : Let f be the flow at the end of a $\Delta$-scaling phase. Then the value of the maximum flow is at most $v(f) + m\Delta$
    - Pf : almost identical to proof of max-flow min-cut theorem
      - end of a $\Delta$-phase, there exists a cut (A, B) such that $cap(A, B) \leq v(f)+m\Delta$ <br> Choose A to be the set of nodes reachable from s in $G_f(\Delta)$
      - By definition of A, s $\in A$
      - By definition of f, t $\notin A$
  - Lemma 3 : There are at most 2m augmentations per scaling phase. Let f be the flow at thhe end of the previous scaling phase. <br> L2 => $v(f^*) \leq v(f) + m(2\Delta)$ <br> each augmentation in a $\Delta$-phase increases v(f) by at least $\Delta$
  - THeorem : The scaling max-flow algorithm finds a max flow in O(mlogC) augmentations. It  can be implemented to run in $O(m^2logC)$ time.

## 4. Bipartite Matching
### Matching
- Input : Un directed graph G = (V, E)
- M is a matching if each node appears in at most edge in M
- Max matching : find a max cardinality matching

### Bipartite matching.
- Input : undirected, bipartite graph G
- Max flow formulation
  - Create digraph G' = ($L \cup R \cup [s, t], E'$)
  - assign unit capacity.
- Proof of Correctness
  - Theorem : Max cardinality matching in G = value of max flow in G'
  - Pf ($\leq$)
    - Given max matching M of cardinality k
    - flow f that sends unit along each of k paths.
    - f is a flow and has cardinality k.
  - Pf ($\ge$)
    - Let f be a max flow in G' of value k
    - Integrality theorem => k is integral and can assmue f is 0-1.
    - consider M = set of edges from L to R with f(e) = 1
    - 1. each node in L and R participates in at most one edge in M
    - 2. $\left\vert M \right\vert$ = k : consider cut(L 합 s, R 합 t)

### Perfect Matching
- Def : matching M is perfect if each node appears in exactly one edge in M
- Clearly $\left\vert L \right\vert$ = $\left\vert R \right\vert$
- Hall's Theorem(Marriage Theorem) Let G be a bipartite graph with $\left\vert L \right\vert$ = $\left\vert R \right\vert$. THen, G has a perfect matching iff $\left\vert N(S) \right\vert \ge$  $\left\vert S \right\vert$ for all subsets $S \subseteq L$.

### Running Time
- max flow algorithm to use for bipartite matching
  - Generic augmenting path(Ford-Furkerson) : O(m val(f*)) = O(mn) (C = 1)
  - Capacity scaling : $O(m^2logC)$ = $O(m^2)$
  - Shortest augmenting path : $O(mn^{1/2})$
- Non-bipartite matching
  - Blossom algorithm : $O(n^4)$ [Edmonds 1965]
  - Best known : $O(mn^{1/2})$ [Micali-Vazirani 1980]